Add first draft of provider documentation (#1)
fiberplane/docs: docs/providers/provider-protocol-reference.md

---
title: Provider Protocol Reference
category: 63e0c7cf7166bf006d3b4117
slug: provider-protocol-reference
---

# Provider Protocol Reference (v2)

All functions described here are bindings generated with fp-bindgen.

> The key/values to use for these payloads are exactly the ones you

Reviewer: This is quite the nitpick, but I notice on the website that newlines are inserted as hard `<br>` tags. This is rather jarring, especially given that different paragraphs seem to have different line lengths in this file. I think we should configure the converter to not insert those tags, but if that's not an easy fix for some reason, at least the line lengths in this file should be consistent. (@keturiosakys)

> can find in `fiberplane::models` [crate documentation](https://docs.rs/fiberplane-models/latest/fiberplane-models)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can find in `fiberplane-models` [crate documentation](https://docs.rs/fiberplane-models/latest/fiberplane-models)
```

## Imported functions

These functions are usable as long as you import `fiberplane_pdk::prelude::*` in

> your library code. These functions exist to allow you to use OS-level features by
> asking the runtime for information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your library code. These functions allow you to access features provided to you by the runtime.
```

> For the Fiberplane Daemon, these functions are implemented in [Provider Runtime
> crate](https://github.com/fiberplane/fiberplane-rs/blob/main/fiberplane-provider-protocol/fiberplane-provider-runtime/src/spec/mod.rs),
> should you want to inspect the source.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the Fiberplane Daemon, these functions are implemented in the [Provider Runtime
crate](https://crates.io/crates/fiberplane-provider-runtime).
```

### `make_http_request`

#### Signature

```rust
pub async fn make_http_request(request: HttpRequest) -> Result<HttpResponse, HttpRequestError>;
```

#### Description

This is the most useful imported function, it allows the providers to make HTTP queries to
remote hosts through the hosting runtime. A basic example of its usage can be seen in the
tutorial to create a provider:

```rust
    let base_url: Url = "https://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com".parse().unwrap();
    let url = base_url
        .join("/users")
        .unwrap();

    let request = HttpRequest {
        url,
        headers: None,
        method: HttpRequestMethod::Get,
        body: None,

>     };

Reviewer: This should be updated to reflect the usage with builders.

crate](https://github.com/fiberplane/fiberplane-rs/blob/6679fbd0f1cbdac7c57422ae699e12bb35bed71b/fiberplane-provider-protocol/fiberplane-provider-runtime/src/spec/mod.rs#L116)
source code.

For example, you could create a
[getrandom](https://docs.rs/getrandom/latest/getrandom/macro.register_custom_getrandom.html#writing-a-custom-getrandom-implementation) provider using it

```rust
// In a helper crate like getrandom_fp_provider
use getrandom::Error;

pub fn use_fp_bindings(buf: &mut [u8]) -> Result<(), Error> {
    let vals = random(buf.len());
    buf.copy_from_slice(&vals);
    Ok(())
}

// In your provider crate
use getrandom_fp_provider::use_fp_bindings;
use getrandom::register_custom_getrandom;

register_custom_getrandom!(use_fp_bindings);
```

> Note: this example snippet might prove generic and useful enough to be upstreamed
  by Fiberplane and available as a public helper crate. Stay tuned!

### `now`

#### Signature

```rust
pub fn now() -> Timestamp;
```

#### Description

Returns a timestamp of the current time of execution. The usefulness of this
timestamp comes from what you want to do with timers, or signature
creation/verification schemes.

> ## Exported functions

Reviewer: I would list the exported functions before the imported functions, since I think they are the starting point when you first implement a provider.

Exported functions are functions that your provider implements, and that the
runtime will call. In order to make those exported functions usable in Fiberplane,
they must be annotated with `#[pdk_export]`.

### `get_supported_query_types`

> It is usually safer to use the Plugin Development Kit macros to let the compiler
> generate correct implementations of these functions. A correct `pdk_query_types!`
> invocation will generate this function for you. See the
> [tutorial](doc:create-a-provider) for more information about using the PDK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is advised to use the Plugin Development Kit rather than implementing this function manually.
The [`pdk_query_types!`](https://docs.rs/fiberplane-pdk/latest/fiberplane_pdk/prelude/macro.pdk_query_types.html) macro can be used to generate this function for you.
See the [tutorial](doc:create-a-provider) for more information about using the PDK.
```

#### Signature

```rust
pub async fn get_supported_query_types(config: ProviderConfig) -> Vec<SupportedQueryType>;
```

#### Description

Returns the query types supported by this provider.
This function allows Studio to know upfront which formats will be
supported, and which providers (and their query types) are eligible to
be selected for certain use cases.

### `invoke2`

> It is usually safer to use the Plugin Development Kit macros to let the compiler
> generate correct implementations of these functions. A correct `pdk_query_types!`
> invocation will generate this function for you. See the
> [tutorial](doc:create-a-provider) for more information about using the PDK

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is advised to use the Plugin Development Kit rather than implementing this function manually.
The [`pdk_query_types!`](https://docs.rs/fiberplane-pdk/latest/fiberplane_pdk/prelude/macro.pdk_query_types.html) macro can be used to generate this function for you.
See the [tutorial](doc:create-a-provider) for more information about using the PDK.
```

#### Signature

```rust
pub async fn invoke2(request: ProviderRequest) -> Result<Blob>;
```

#### Description

Invokes the provider to perform a data request.

### `create_cells` (Optional)

#### Signature

```rust
pub fn create_cells(query_type: String, response: Blob) -> Result<Vec<Cell>>;
```

#### Description

Creates output cells based on the response (a `Blob` that the provider
previously sent to answer an `invoke2` call).
Studio would typically embed the created cells in the provider cell,
but other actions could be desired.

When any created cells use a `data-links` field with the value
`cell-data:<mime-type>,self` (such as Log cells or Graph cells),
Studio will replace the value `self` with
the ID of the cell for which the query was invoked. This allows the
provider to create cells that reference its own data without knowing the
context of the cell in which it was executed.

> Note: When the MIME type in the provider response is
> `application/vnd.fiberplane.cells` (suffixed with either `+json` or
> `+msgpack`), Studio will elide the call to `create_cells()` and simply
> parse the data directly to a `Vec<Cell>`. This is what makes
> `create_cells`'s implementation optional.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that implementing `create_cells` is optional. If `invoke2` returns a Blob with a MIME type
of `application/vnd.fiberplane.cells` (suffixed with either `+json` or `+msgpack`), that response
will be parsed into an array of cells, and the call to this function is elided. A consequence of
this approach is that the blob with the response does not get stored on the provider cell --
only the parsed cells will be stored. This can make this approach less suitable for graph cells
and log cells, for instance, but makes it more efficient when there is no need to refer to the
data after the cells are instantiated.
```

### `extract_data` (Optional)

#### Signature

```rust
pub fn extract_data(response: Blob, mime_type: String, query: Option<String>) -> Result<Blob>;
```

#### Description

Takes the response data, and returns it in the given MIME type,
optionally passing an additional query string to customize extraction
behavior.

Returns `Err(Error::UnsupportedRequest)` if an unsupported MIME type is
passed.

> 

Reviewer: I think we should add a paragraph:

```suggestion
Please be aware that in order for Studio to parse response blobs, the MIME type has to specify the
encoding format, using either the `+json` or `+msgpack` suffix. This applies to all the MIME types
recognized by Studio, such as:

* `application/vnd.fiberplane.cells`
* `application/vnd.fiberplane.events`
* `application/vnd.fiberplane.timeseries`

While Blobs must specify the encoding suffix for their data to be correctly parsed, the `mime_type`
that is *requested* does not specify it. The implementation is then free to decide which encoding
to use for the blob it returns.

When deriving the [`ProviderData` trait](https://docs.rs/fiberplane-pdk/latest/fiberplane_pdk/provider_data/trait.ProviderData.html), its `to_blob()` helper will automatically pick a suitable encoding for you.
```

Note: When the MIME type in the provider response is the same as the

> MIME type given as the second argument, and the `query` is omitted, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MIME type given as the second argument (sans encoding suffix), and the `query` is omitted, the
```
